It's an adrenaline rush.
Because every day they're out there
trying to outsmart you, right?
And when you catch them, it's like
yeah, that was a good day.
They don't have nowhere to go.
Anywhere they can hide, they'll hide.
But, they'll find them eventually,
they'll find them.
Here, because this is the border,
there's always going to be illegal
crossings of some kind.
How do you stop this here?
What do you do?
If you were looking for an ideal place to see the chaotic
and sometimes heartbreaking reality
of the U.S.-Mexico border,
You'd want to ride along with the U.S. Border Patrol
since they are the ones who are
paid to keep people and dope from
getting across it. And you'd want to do
it in Texas because Texas has far more
border land than any other state.
And then you can make your way down to the Rio
Grande valley in the southern tip of
Texas where there are more people
apprehended and more pounds of dope
seized than in any other area along the
texas-Mexico border.
In the spring of 2016 The Texas Tribune went
to the valley, to Roma, Texas
and its surroundings in rural Starr County
and found what looked and
felt like a smuggler's paradise
There are no man-made physical barriers
to speak of here.
No big walls or fences. There are plenty
of river islands to stash humans and
drugs. Lots of places to hide.
plus they don't keep boats in the water
around the clock here.
And just like they told us once those
border patrol boats come off the river,
the cat and mouse game begins. All you
have to do is listen to their radios
And it's like this every day, you know, so, it's busy.
Our chief guide was Border
Patrol agent, José Perales.
He's a 16-year veteran of the agency, a
lifer.
You know that he sort of lives to show
the outside world what's happening down
here and you know why he picked Roma
Texas to do the show
The river is very close to Roma. So they
can actually just run like two blocks
and they're on 83.
We have a lot of traffic that runs into
the Dollar General.
See where the brush start right there?
That's the drop down to the river.
So they run, how long will it take you to
run from there to to those stores and
get lost in the public?
It's maybe, what, a 15 second, 10 to 15
second run to the top?
You come out here and you end up in vehicle pursuits.
There's days that you get assaulted, you get
into fights.
You go and you're chasing people, you're
running you trip over, you can easily fall.
This is the area that they work, and they
know this area very well. They know
the terrain better than we do sometimes.
The cartels have to move the
people and their narcotics, right?
They have to come up with tactics and we
have to counter those tactics, and it's
it's a cat-and-mouse game all the time.
It's always strategizing, always like how
we gonna do this? How we gonna catch
these guys? So sometimes you don't see
them but you know like
they gotta be around here.
But if you really slow down
you can actually, sometimes you can
even smell them.
You can just smell somebody else's
sweat, right? And a lot of times these
people have been in stash houses on the
south side for days.
So hence, they haven't taken a shower for
days, so you can actually smell them.
For the people who live along
the river's edge in Roma, dealing with
the constant flow of undocumented
immigrants has become a way of life.
A while ago, we just saw two,  like five minutes ago before you'll got here,
there was two running right over there
straight to the store.
Activity everywhere. You can see it everywhere.
And Rio Grande's the same thing,
You see people getting caught
all the side of the road.
They come in through all the sides of
the river. From here to Rio,
you willl see them everywhere.
Roma sits right across the river from
Ciudad Miguel Alemán.
Where in recent years two rival mafias, The Gulf
Cartel and The Zetas, have fought
pitched battles for control of this
lucrative smuggling corridor for access
to the U.S. Drug and labor markets.
This is the other half of that smuggling
paradise we found in Roma. Only paradise
isn't a word you find yourself using in
the same sentence with Miguel Alemán or
the state it sits in, Tamaulipas.
You can still see the scars of cartel
warfare, which can flare at any moment
and locals say the real bosses in Miguel Alemán
are the drug lords, not the government.
Only a river divides us from
Miguel Alemán, but Roma might as well be
on a different planet.
It's easy to fear the border but then
you run across all these kids.
Kids traveling alone. Kids fleeing lives of desperation.
Kids who are coming here to join their
undocumented parents.
That's where the big numbers are down
here, it's the kids and the family units,
as they're called. They are the ones who
are pushing up the apprehension figures
and they don't run they turn themselves in.
They cross them, and then they tell them,
okay, just follow the road
all the way to the top.
So here comes the family units just walking the road
Typically what we hear, you know, they're
fleeing away from violence or a certain
gang or it's mainly gangs that thy're fleeing from.
So I get why they're leaving.
I mean and we all understand it, but
you know at the end the day we still have
a job to do, you know, and all of them can
apply for asylum.
It will be up to the immigration
judge to decide you know their fate know
where yes they stay or they have a
legitimate reason or they don't.
So we don't have a say-so in that.
Our job is to catch them, and
process them, and set them up to see
an immigration judge. And that's to the
extent, you know, that we're getting involved.
We met a 14 year old girl from Guatemala.
Her name was alejandra. She traveled here
with her brother and cousin. They were forced to
cross the river alone when their smuggler
abandoned them on the Mexican side.
My cousin lives over there. This is the old
estate home my grandma used to live in there.
Ruperto Escobar has been ranching along the Rio
Grande his whole life, just like his
parents and their ancestors, all the way
back to the mid-seventeen hundreds.
Smugglers have used his land for years
to move people and product.
he doesn't see that changing anytime
soon.
It's mainly the disturbances at night, early hours
in the morning, that's when they do their stuff.
Waking you up because you you hear the
sounds or the dogs are constantly
barking so you get up to see what's
going on, you know? I stopped fixing gates.
I stop putting them up. I don't close
those main gates, as you come in,
I don't close them. What for? They ram into them.
So what do you do? Do I run to the police and tell them, "Hey,  go catch them, they're there."
Then what happens? What do you think will
happen next?
They're going to know who did it. And I
wouldn't put it past them to go in and
and do some harm to me the following day
or or next week or the following week so
we just, you know what? Let them be.
We had to briefly stop the interview
with him while two "coyotes," slang for
smugglers, moved a load of undocumented
Mexican workers over his ranch.
Mira. See that?
You just have to swallow your pride sort of.
And say, okay, well you know what?
Just don't bother us, just leave us alone,
and we'll leave you alone.
Because at that moment they're going
to come and catch them.
But then I have to live here the rest of
my life like my ancestors lived here all
their lives. Police are not going to come and stay
with me and take care of me after
I do something like that. And it's not just me.
I mean, it happens to all of us
up and down the border here.
It sounds not too brave but what do you do?
You've got to survive.
Oh